New article: "Performance best practices for WebView2 apps" (#3684)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/webview2/concepts/performance.md

Author: replace curly quotes

Author: in each section/point, add a See Also link.

Author: pls provide some urls for more info
added in each section, 24x:

```
<!--
todo:
See also:
* []()
-->
```

@prija-microsoft, @Lakshmisha-KS

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Network and Loading Performance

Network latency and bandwidth can dominate user-perceived performance, especially when loading web content in a WebView2.

The following best practices overlap with general web development.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Utilize caching and service workers

WebView2 supports browser caching; serve proper cache headers so repeat resource requests use cached versions.

Consider pre-caching static files with a service worker for offline access, but monitor cache size.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Check network bottlenecks

Use the DevTools Network tab to identify slow resources in WebView2.

Optimize or asynchronously load slow third-party scripts or APIs as needed.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Reduce initial payloads

Keep HTML light, defer heavy components, and lazy-load images or scripts after initial UI appear to improve perceived speed. 

<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Communication with Host Application (WebView2 communicating with .NET<!-- todo: Win32, WinRT -->)

Author: probably:
`## Communication between the WebView2 control and the host app`

You can record **Edge/WebView2** provider events, by using Event Tracing for Windows (ETW); see [Gathering an ETW Trace](https://aka.ms/wv2etw).

Analyze traces in Windows Performance Analyzer for CPU, disk, and memory data.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Microsoft Edge DevTools

Use Microsoft Edge DevTools to monitor WebView2 content and processes, to identify issues such as high CPU or memory leaks.

See also:
* [Microsoft Edge DevTools documentation](../../devtools/landing/index.yml)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Inspect with Edge Developer Tools

Use `edge://inspect`, which opens the **Inspect with Edge Developer Tools** tab, to monitor WebView2 content and processes, to identify issues such as high CPU or memory leaks.

![Inspect with Edge Developer Tools](./performance-images/inspect.png)

<!-- todo: that tool is used for:
[Attach DevTools remotely to a desktop WebView2 WinUI 2 (UWP) app](../how-to/remote-debugging-desktop.md#attach-devtools-remotely-to-a-desktop-webview2-winui-2-uwp-app) in _Remote debugging desktop WebView2 WinUI 2 (UWP) apps_
-->

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

> #### Browser Task Manager<!-- todo: is this tool what's meant? -->

Author: is the intended tool: 
* `edge://inspect` opens the **Inspect with Edge Developer Tools** tab
* Browser Task Manager

rendered sections:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/webview2/concepts/performance?branch=pr-en-us-3684#inspect-with-edge-developer-tools

draft doc:
<img width="572" height="68" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fa182517-75c1-47e2-85f5-1bbd793fb711" />

@Lakshmisha-KS

Reviewer: See my previous comment, we should keep the `edge://inspect` section. It is possible to inspect WebView2 processes by using that page, per https://learn.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/webview2/how-to/remote-debugging-desktop

Author: <img width="861" height="662" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/14e77e1a-5764-43d7-aeed-a52ffcae1e58" />

   * [Identify the bottleneck type](#identify-the-bottleneck-type)
   * [Test with simple content](#test-with-simple-content)
   * [Verify the WebView2 Runtime version](#verify-the-webview2-runtime-version)
   * [Monitor memory usage](#monitor-memory-usage)
   * [Compare WebView2 with Microsoft Edge](#compare-webview2-with-microsoft-edge)
* [See also](#see-also)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Use the Evergreen Runtime

Many past performance issues, like memory leaks and high CPU usage, have been addressed in newer versions of the WebView2 Runtime.

Whenever possible, deploy your app with the Evergreen WebView2 Runtime, which updates automatically with the latest performance improvements and security fixes.  Keep the WebView2 Runtime evergreen (that is, updated), to future-proof your app.

Using a fixed version risks missing out on recent optimizations.  If you must use a fixed runtime for offline or compatibility reasons, update it regularly after testing new builds.

Test your app using the latest WebView2 preview channels (Beta, Dev, or Canary), to prepare for upcoming changes.

<!--
todo:
See also:
* []()

> -->

Reviewer: Should we link to https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/webview2/concepts/distribution?tabs=dotnetcsharp#the-evergreen-runtime-distribution-mode ?

Reviewer 2: Yes. That is a good suggestion. We should

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Optimize startup performance

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Cold start (cold launch)

A common performance bottleneck is the time to create a WebView2 and navigate it the first time.  On a cold launch, WebView2 must spin up its processes and disk caches, which can introduce a noticeable delay (which can vary by hardware and content complexity).

To optimize startup, use the following best practices.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Don't use WebView2 for initial UI

Avoid rendering splash screens or simple dialogs with WebView2, due to startup costs and resource contention.  Use lightweight XAML or Win32 screens instead, initializing WebView2 only when displaying actual web content.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Optimize the User Data Folder (UDF) location

Keep the UDF in the default local app data folder, for performance.

Avoid slow drives or network shares; put the data on a faster, physical disk.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

> #### Avoid redundant WebView2 instances

Reviewer 2: Can we make these numbered lists. That would be more visually structured

Plan your UI so that you don't create more WebView2 controls than necessary.

For example, if navigating between multiple web pages, it might be faster to reuse a single WebView2 and simply navigate it to a new URL, rather than destroying and re-creating a WebView2 control.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Memory usage and process management

Each WebView2 control creates its own set of processes, such as browser, renderer, and GPU.  Resource usage generally grows as more WebView2 instances are created, with each instance running its own set of browser processes.

A WebView2 instance uses memory based on the complexity of the web content and the browser processes it creates.  Running many instances of the WebView2 control can strain system memory.

Below are best practices to manage and reduce the memory footprint.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

> #### Share WebView2 environments

Reviewer 2: The comment no longer holds.
https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer/pull/3684#discussion_r2679883939

> To save memory, use one `CoreWebView2Environment` across all WebView2 controls in an app, ensuring consistent parameters for sharing.

Reviewer 2: Visually it would be better if we can have these as either single paragraphs or bullet points in my opinion

Author: the draft Doc:
<img width="638" height="446" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ed302f7f-cbc2-4185-a6dd-d515fd87809a" />

the existing PR: 
<img width="862" height="782" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c6b48314-c033-4c05-9043-64f7dba6f834" />

probably keep as-is?  analyzing the suggestion...
@Lakshmisha-KS @captainbrosset

Reuse the same environment in tabbed interfaces, rather than creating multiple environments.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

> #### App-level process sharing

Reviewer 2: Can we make these numbered lists. That would be more visually structured

Reviewer 2: The comment no longer holds.
https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer/pull/3684#discussion_r2679883939

Multiple apps can share a browser process by using the identical user data folder and `CoreWebView2EnvironmentOptions`.

This reduces memory usage, but requires careful management of profiles and thorough testing, due to possible cross-app interference.

Keep in mind that with sharing a User Data Folder (UDF), underlying data (such as cookies, caches, and databases) is being shared between different applications.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Avoid large-scope host objects

> If you use `AddHostObjectToScript` to expose .NET objects to the web, be mindful of what those objects hold in memory.  The entire object is effectively referenced as long as the script context continues to live, which could prevent garbage collection of that object on the .NET side.

Reviewer: Similar to previous comments, we should take the fact that we're referring to specific features or classes as opportunities to link to them in **See also** sections throughout the article.

Author: covered by file-level PR Comment
https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer/pull/3684/files#r2676880966
 + 24x hidden todo comments; closing

Author: ```
See also:
* [Host/web object sharing](./overview-features-apis.md#hostweb-object-sharing) in _Overview of WebView2 APIs_.
```
sometimes can link to Overview APIs section and/or have tabset linking directly to API Ref
@captainbrosset

> Don't expose a very large object graph, if only a small part is needed for scripting.  When the page that needed the object graph is gone, call `CoreWebView2.RemoveHostObjectFromScript` to release the object graph.

Reviewer: @Lakshmisha-KS can we say more about how developers can create smaller objects here? Is this trivial info they already know, or should/can we help them with more practical information here?

For example, if you navigate away from a page that was using a host object, remove that object, to avoid keeping it alive behind the scenes.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Prevent memory leaks

> Remove event handlers before disposing WebView2 objects, to avoid reference cycles and leaks.

Author: Clarify whether native or web; is this Best Practice item telling Devs to:
  * Remove event handlers that are set in their JavaScript web code that's running inside wv2 objects.
  * Remove native event handlers.

Lead-in/ the best practice:
* Remove event handlers before disposing WebView2 objects, to avoid reference cycles and leaks.

@Lakshmisha-KS @prija-microsoft

Avoid closures that strongly reference WebView2; use weak references when necessary.

Call `webView.Dispose()` to dispose of WebView2 objects when they're no longer needed.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Use memory management APIs

> Set `MemoryUsageTargetLevel = CoreWebView2MemoryUsageTargetLevel.Low` on inactive WebViews to reduce memory usage—this may prompt **Chromium to drop cached data** or swap memory to disk.  When the WebView2 instance is again active, restore the target level to `Normal`, for full performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set `MemoryUsageTargetLevel = CoreWebView2MemoryUsageTargetLevel.Low` on inactive WebViews to reduce memory usage—this may prompt **Edge to drop cached data** or swap memory to disk.  When the WebView2 instance is again active, restore the target level to `Normal`, for full performance.
```

Sure, Edge is based on Chromium, but I don't see a reason to say this here, especially because we're not explaining the link before.

Author: omitting spurious bold, from draft doc:
<img width="602" height="259" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3921ee72-e894-4f30-a41f-ae0507eecc99" />

If the WebView2 instance won't be used for a while, call `CoreWebView2.TrySuspendAsync()` to suspend the renderer process, which pauses scripts and further decreases resource use.  Resume with `Resume()` when needed.  These `Try` operations are best-effort.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Optimize web content

> Optimize the rendered content if you observe excessive memory is being utilized in the JS heap, use Microsoft Edge DevTools to monitor usage of resources by web content.

Reviewer: Can developers easily see how much JS heap is used? Is this something they can see in Visual Studio? We should perhaps say more here. No every dev might know how to check the JS heap.

And then, we should be more specific about which Edge DevTools tool we're asking them to use: **Memory**.

Also, let's tell readers how to open DevTools.

Author: ```
#### Optimize web content

Optimize the rendered content.  Observe whether excessive memory is being 
used in the JS heap.  Use Microsoft Edge DevTools, such as the **Memory** 
tool, to monitor usage of memory resources by various web content.
<!-- todo:
how to check the js heap; how do devs see how much js heap is used?
can they see that in visual studio?
-->

To check the JS heap:

1. Right-click the WebView2 app, and then select **Inspect**.

   DevTools opens in a dedicated, undocked window.

1. Select the **Memory** (![Memory icon](./performance-images/memory-icon.png)) tool.

See also:
* [Fix memory problems](../../devtools/memory-problems/index.md)
```
@prija-microsoft @Lakshmisha-KS - how to check js heap? 

added todo comment (& how DevTools > Mem tool)

broke up orig run-on sentence, draft doc:
<img width="587" height="90" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/07e9cd93-71e5-440e-b6dd-beff4fa9693b" />

linked to more specific article instead of whole devtools docset

See [Microsoft Edge DevTools documentation](../../devtools/landing/index.yml).

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Periodically refresh the WebView2

> Some long-running pages might retain resources over time, depending on the web content and application design.  If memory usage grows unexpectedly, review JavaScript heap usage, event listeners, and DOM retention using DevTools.

Author: entered todo's in the .md:
```
See also:
* [todo] - to check heap usage.
* [todo]() - to check event listeners.
* [todo]() - to check DOM retention.
```
@prija-microsoft , @Lakshmisha-KS

> Some long-running pages might retain resources over time, depending on the web content and application design.  If memory usage grows unexpectedly, review JavaScript heap usage, event listeners, and DOM retention using DevTools.

Author: closing, might enter PR Comment at each todo later

In scenarios where the page lifecycle naturally accumulates state, a periodic refresh of the WebView2 instance can help return the process to a clean baseline.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## CPU and rendering performance

> WebView2 offloads web content rendering to the Chromium engine, so performance characteristics are like running a site in Edge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WebView2 offloads web content rendering to the browser engine that Edge uses, so performance characteristics are like running a site in Edge.
```

The following practices ensure efficient CPU usage and smooth rendering.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Enable hardware acceleration

> By default, WebView2 uses the GPU for rendering.  Avoid disabling this use of the GPU, unless troubleshooting, because it's critical for performance.

Reviewer: How would someone know if they have disabled GPU or not? We should say where this setting is located so devs can check.

GPU drivers and additional buffers must be allocated, which requires additional memory.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Streamline web content

Optimize pages by using the following techniques:

* Limit heavy JavaScript.

* Debounce or throttle tasks.

* Use CSS (rather than JavaScript) for animations.

* Split long scripts to keep the UI responsive.

* Use Microsoft Edge DevTools to identify bottlenecks.

> * Use typical web optimization: avoid excessive layout thrashing, where a script alternates between reading and writing DOM properties, causing multiple reflows.

Reviewer: This is a very short summary of web performance optimization, and it lacks ways for developers who don't have a lot of experience with this area to learn more. These folks might read this and feel discouraged by these performance techniques they've never heard of, not know how to do any of these things or what they even mean.

We should at least link to DevTools docs like:

* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools/performance/overview
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools/performance/
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools/rendering-tools/
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools/speed/get-started

Author: ```
See also:
* [Performance tool: Analyze your website's performance](../../devtools/performance/overview.md)
* [Analyze runtime performance (tutorial)](../../devtools/performance/index.md)
* [Troubleshooting common performance issues](../../devtools/rendering-tools/index.md)
* [Optimize website speed using Lighthouse](../../devtools/speed/get-started.md)
```

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Reduce unnecessary communication

> To improve performance, reduce unnecessary communication between the host and WebView2.

Author: fresh: https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer/pull/3684/files#r2688418780

> Frequent message passing can increase CPU usage, so batch messages wherever possible.

Author: result
```
* Reduce unnecessary communication 
between native code and web code running in WebView2
<!-- todo: orig: between the host and WebView2 -->.

* Batch messages wherever possible, because frequent message passing can increase CPU usage.
```

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Manage process priority

> WebView2 creates separate renderer processes.  In apps with heavy native workloads, assign thread priorities carefully to avoid starving WebView2 threads.

Reviewer: How can developers do this? We need links to learn more at least.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Test real scenarios

Always test your actual content on target hardware, using Microsoft Edge DevTools to find and optimize performance issues.

To understand how Chromium isolates work to reduce memory and improve stability, see [Process Model and Site Isolation](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/main/docs/process_model_and_site_isolation.md).

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Network and loading performance

Network latency and bandwidth can dominate user-perceived performance, especially when loading web content in a WebView2.

The following best practices overlap with general web development.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Utilize caching and service workers

WebView2 supports browser caching; serve proper cache headers, so that repeated resource requests use cached versions.

> Consider pre-caching static files by using a service worker, for offline access; but monitor the cache size.

Reviewer: To view cached data: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools/storage/cache

For service workers, let's link to https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API/Using_Service_Workers
While we have service worker-related docs, they're about pwa, so might be confusing to point to here.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Check network bottlenecks

Use the DevTools **Network** tool to identify slow resources in WebView2; see [Inspect network activity](../../devtools/network/index.md).

Optimize or asynchronously load slow third-party scripts or APIs, as needed.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Reduce initial payloads

To improve perceived speed:

* Keep HTML light.

* Defer heavy components.

* Lazy-load images or scripts after the initial UI appears.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Communication between the WebView2 control and the host app

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Choose the right communication channel

> WebView2 provides various web-to-host and host-to-web communication options.  Typically, Web Messages are best, due to their simplicity and reliability.

Reviewer 2: Web Message selection is an important aspect of Performance - Memory usage and time. Hence this section delves into the same.

@prija-microsoft : Does this make sense?

> Use Host Objects only when you need a more complex API, as they can be less stable if the object changes or if there are COM marshalling issues.

Author: closing comment, to review result in a clean PR, for @prija-microsoft to validate.  
result:
```
#### Choose the right communication channel

WebView2 provides various web-to-host and host-to-web communication options.  Typically, Web Messages are best, due to their simplicity and reliability.

Use Host Objects only when you need capabilities that Web Messages can't easily express, such as:

* Rich, object‑like APIs (methods, properties, events) you want to expose directly to JavaScript.

* Stateful interactions where maintaining host-side context is simpler than passing structured messages back and forth.

* Large or binary data flows where repeatedly string‑serializing payloads into Web Messages becomes inefficient.

However, Host Objects have the following tradeoffs:

* Host Objects require COM marshalling, which can introduce instability if the object graph changes or isn’t marshalled correctly.

* Host Objects are generally slower for chatty, frequent calls compared to a single batched WebMessage because each method/property access crosses the boundary individually.

* Host Objects create a tighter coupling between web and host code, reducing portability.

Web Messages tend to be more efficient than Host Objects, unless your API surface truly needs the richer semantics of Host Objects.<!-- todo: delete? -->

See also:
* [Interop of native and web code](../how-to/communicate-btwn-web-native.md)
```

See also:
* [Interop of native and web code](../how-to/communicate-btwn-web-native.md)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Optimize communication

> It is recommended to implement asynchronous, batched communication, to minimize IPC communication and reduce data copying.

Author: result:
```
#### Optimize communication

Implement asynchronous, batched communication, to minimize IPC communication and reduce data copying.

See also:
* [Web/native interop](./overview-features-apis.md#webnative-interop) in _Overview of WebView2 APIs_.
* [Interop of native and web code](../how-to/communicate-btwn-web-native.md)
```
closing comment b/c might be sufficient; to keep PR clean.
@Lakshmisha-KS @prija-microsoft @captainbrosset

* Expose only the operations and data the page actually needs.  For example, expose a `FileService` object, instead of your entire `AppContext`.

* Wrap complex objects behind small façades to avoid unintentionally exposing deep object hierarchies.

* For collections, provide filtered or paged results rather than exposing the full data structure.

When the page that needed the object is gone, call `CoreWebView2.RemoveHostObjectFromScript` to release the object graph.  For example, if you navigate away from a page that was using a host object, remove that object, to avoid keeping it alive behind the scenes.

See also:
* [Host/web object sharing](./overview-features-apis.md#hostweb-object-sharing) in _Overview of WebView2 APIs_.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Prevent memory leaks

* Remove native event handlers before disposing WebView2 objects, to avoid reference cycles and leaks.

* Avoid closures that strongly reference WebView2; use weak references when necessary.

* Call `webView.Dispose()` to dispose of WebView2 objects when they're no longer needed.

See also:
* [Fix memory problems](../../devtools/memory-problems/index.md)

> * [WebView2.Dispose(Boolean) Method](/dotnet/api/microsoft.web.webview2.wpf.webview2.dispose)<!-- todo: correct link? -->

Author: <img width="681" height="265" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e0498534-5abd-41fa-a8d6-b60ca8539eda" />

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Check network bottlenecks

Use the DevTools **Network** tool to identify slow resources in WebView2; see [Inspect network activity](../../devtools/network/index.md).

Optimize or asynchronously load slow third-party scripts or APIs, as needed.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Reduce initial payloads

To improve perceived speed:

* Keep the initial payload light.  Prefer sending static HTML initially, because it usually loads, parses, and renders faster than JavaScript.  Be cautious about initially using JavaScript along with a single-page-app framework; such a framework typically loads a lot of code on startup, which can delay the initial rendering of the web content.

   HTML loads, parses, and renders very fast—faster than the time it would've taken JavaScript to produce the same UI.  With some single-page-app JS frameworks, even if the framework's initial HTML is small, the entire framework code must be downloaded, parsed, and run, before anything can be displayed.

* Defer heavy components.

* Lazy-load images or scripts after the initial UI appears.

See also:

> * [Inspect, edit, and debug HTML and CSS with the Elements tool](../../devtools/elements-tool/elements-tool.md)<!-- todo: better link? -->

Author: Is there a better link for this section?

**Inspect, edit, and debug HTML and CSS with the Elements tool**
https://learn.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/devtools/elements-tool/elements-tool

Rendered section:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/webview2/concepts/performance?branch=pr-en-us-3684&tabs=dotnetcsharp#reduce-initial-payloads

@prija-microsoft

Author: <img width="872" height="381" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fb9a0b11-d853-4168-a244-6f8152474b67" />

* Some long-running pages might retain resources over time, depending on the web content and application design.  If memory usage grows unexpectedly, review the following by using DevTools:

   * JavaScript heap usage.  See:
      * [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool ("Heap snapshot" profiling type)](../../devtools/memory-problems\heap-snapshots.md)

   * Event listeners.  See:
      * [Analyze the lack of keyboard support by using the Event Listeners tab](../../devtools/accessibility/test-analyze-no-keyboard-support.md#analyze-the-lack-of-keyboard-support-by-using-the-event-listeners-tab) in _Analyze keyboard support on forms_, about the **Event Listeners** tab in the **Elements** tool.
      * [Select performance metrics to monitor](../../devtools/performance-monitor/performance-monitor-tool.md#select-performance-metrics-to-monitor) in _Measure runtime performance of a page using the Performance monitor tool_, about the **JS event listeners** metric.

>    * DOM retention. See:

Author: Best link about DOM retention?

See also
* [WebView2 browser flags](./webview-features-flags.md) - `disable-gpu`

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Streamline web content

Optimize pages by using the following techniques:

* Limit heavy JavaScript.

* Debounce or throttle tasks.

* Use CSS (rather than JavaScript) for animations.

* Split long scripts to keep the UI responsive.

* Use Microsoft Edge DevTools to identify bottlenecks.

* Use typical web optimization: avoid excessive layout thrashing, where a script alternates between reading and writing DOM properties, causing multiple reflows.

See also:
* [Performance tool: Analyze your website's performance](../../devtools/performance/overview.md)
* [Analyze runtime performance (tutorial)](../../devtools/performance/index.md)
* [Troubleshooting common performance issues](../../devtools/rendering-tools/index.md)
* [Optimize website speed using Lighthouse](../../devtools/speed/get-started.md)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Reduce unnecessary communication

* Reduce unnecessary communication between native code and web code running in WebView2.
<!--
* Reduce unnecessary communication between between the host and WebView2.

> todo: which?

Author: which?
* Reduce unnecessary communication between native code and web code running in WebView2.
* Reduce unnecessary communication between the host and WebView2.

The 1st version above is the revised version.
The 2nd version above is the orig draft, per draft doc:
<img width="588" height="69" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0ca9af7a-e965-4728-9ae3-a945d627ab04" />

@prija-microsoft, @Lakshmisha-KS

Reviewer 3: What we mean to say in this is between host application, and web content hosted in webview2, primarily due to inter process communication involved in this (and overheads along with that), mentioned in details in https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/webview2/how-to/communicate-btwn-web-native

Author: result:
```
* Reduce unnecessary communication between the host application and web content 
that's hosted in WebView2.  This avoids excessive inter-process communication, along 
with the accompanying overhead.  See [Interop of native and web code]
(../how-to/communicate-btwn-web-native.md).
```
@captainbrosset

## Communication between the WebView2 control and the host app

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Choose the right communication channel

WebView2 provides various web-to-host and host-to-web communication options.  Typically, Web Messages are best, due to their simplicity and reliability.

Use Host Objects only when you need capabilities that Web Messages can't easily express, such as:

* Rich, object‑like APIs (methods, properties, events) you want to expose directly to JavaScript.

* Stateful interactions where maintaining host-side context is simpler than passing structured messages back and forth.

* Large or binary data flows where repeatedly string‑serializing payloads into Web Messages becomes inefficient.

However, Host Objects have the following tradeoffs:

* Host Objects require COM marshalling, which can introduce instability if the object graph changes or isn’t marshalled correctly.

* Host Objects are generally slower for chatty, frequent calls compared to a single batched WebMessage because each method/property access crosses the boundary individually.

* Host Objects create a tighter coupling between web and host code, reducing portability.

> Web Messages tend to be more efficient than Host Objects, unless your API surface truly needs the richer semantics of Host Objects.<!-- todo: delete? -->

Author: deleted b/c dup of top of section

#### Microsoft Edge DevTools

Use Microsoft Edge DevTools to monitor WebView2 content and processes, to identify issues such as high CPU or memory leaks.

Right-click a WebView2 control in a WebView2 app, and then select **Inspect**.  For example, right-click the main, [Win32 sample app](../samples/webview2apissample.md), and then click **Inspect**.  DevTools opens in an undocked, dedicated browser window.

In DevTools, you can use tools such as the **Memory** tool and **Performance** tool:

![Performance tool in Edge DevTools](./performance-images/performance-tool.png)

See also:
* [Debug WebView2 apps with Microsoft Edge DevTools](../how-to/debug-devtools.md)
* [Performance tool: Analyze your website's performance](../../devtools/performance/overview.md)
* [Fix memory problems](../../devtools/memory-problems/index.md) - the **Memory** tool.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Inspect with Edge Developer Tools

Use `edge://inspect`, which opens the **Inspect with Edge Developer Tools** tab, to monitor WebView2 content and processes, to identify issues such as high CPU or memory leaks.

![Inspect with Edge Developer Tools](./performance-images/inspect.png)

See also:

> * [Remote debugging desktop WebView2 WinUI 2 (UWP) apps](../how-to/remote-debugging-desktop.md)

Author: That's a common design question globally in article, where to place See Also link:
* in the sentence/paragraph.  ("promoted")
* at bottom of section.  ("hidden")

@Lakshmisha-KS @captainbrosset @prija-microsoft -- fyi b/c we wish to add many See Also links.

There's also the question of whether to add "metadata" describing a link, eg in this case:
"To learn more about foo, see [Bar]."
esp. when that content is not obvious from the title/heading of link.

Impl'd; Closing.

@captainbrosset , trying a different flow-sequence, possible b/c See Also is replaced by verbose sentence:
<img width="861" height="662" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/53cd7c6f-e377-4337-a5f7-af42c7ace030" />

See also:
* [Memory usage target](./overview-features-apis.md#memory-usage-target) in _Overview of WebView2 APIs_.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Optimize web content

Optimize the rendered content if you observe excessive memory is being utilized in the JS heap, use Microsoft Edge DevTools to monitor usage of resources by web content.

See [Microsoft Edge DevTools documentation](../../devtools/landing/index.yml).

<!--
todo:
See also:
* []()
-->

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Periodically refresh the WebView2

Some long-running pages might retain resources over time, depending on the web content and application design.  If memory usage grows unexpectedly, review JavaScript heap usage, event listeners, and DOM retention using DevTools.

In scenarios where the page lifecycle naturally accumulates state, a periodic refresh of the WebView2 instance can help return the process to a clean baseline.

See also:
* [todo] - to check heap usage.
* [todo]() - to check event listeners.

> * [todo]() - to check DOM retention.

Author: link: re: DOM retention?

Author: fresh https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer/pull/3684/files#r2692121358

See also:
* [View Cache data](../../devtools/storage/cache.md)
* [Using Service Workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API/Using_Service_Workers) at MDN.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Check network bottlenecks

Use the DevTools **Network** tool to identify slow resources in WebView2; see [Inspect network activity](../../devtools/network/index.md).

Optimize or asynchronously load slow third-party scripts or APIs, as needed.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Reduce initial payloads

To improve perceived speed:

* Keep HTML light.  With modern single-page-app frameworks, the initial HTML payload is very small.  HTML usually loads, parses, and renders much faster than the equivalent UI written with a single-page-app JavaScript framework.

* Defer heavy components.

* Lazy-load images or scripts after the initial UI appears.

<!--
todo:
See also:
* []()
-->

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Communication between the WebView2 control and the host app

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Choose the right communication channel

> WebView2 provides various web-to-host and host-to-web communication options.  Typically, Web Messages are best, due to their simplicity and reliability.

Author: ```suggestion
WebView2 provides various web-to-host and host-to-web communication options.  Typically, Web Messages are faster because of both memory usage and time, due to their simplicity and reliability.
```
@prija-microsoft @captainbrosset - partial improvement

* Expose only the operations and data the page actually needs.  For example, expose a `FileService` object, instead of your entire `AppContext`.

* Wrap complex objects behind small façades to avoid unintentionally exposing deep object hierarchies.

* For collections, provide filtered or paged results rather than exposing the full data structure.

When the page that needed the object is gone, call `CoreWebView2.RemoveHostObjectFromScript` to release the object graph.  For example, if you navigate away from a page that was using a host object, remove that object, to avoid keeping it alive behind the scenes.

See also:
* [Host/web object sharing](./overview-features-apis.md#hostweb-object-sharing) in _Overview of WebView2 APIs_.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Prevent memory leaks

* Remove event handlers before disposing WebView2 objects, to avoid reference cycles and leaks.
  <!-- todo: clarify whether native or web; is this asking devs to:
  * Remove event handlers that are set in their JavaScript web code that's running inside wv2 objects.
  * Remove native event handlers.

>   -->

Reviewer 3: This is talking about native event handlers, before disposing webview2 objects

<!--
todo:
See also:
* []()
-->

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Use memory management APIs

* Set `MemoryUsageTargetLevel = CoreWebView2MemoryUsageTargetLevel.Low` on inactive WebViews to reduce memory usage—this may prompt the browser engine to drop cached data or swap memory to disk.  When the WebView2 instance is again active, restore the target level to `Normal`, for full performance.  See [Memory usage target](./overview-features-apis.md#memory-usage-target) in _Overview of WebView2 APIs_.

* If the WebView2 instance won't be used for a while, call `CoreWebView2.TrySuspendAsync()` to suspend the renderer process, which pauses scripts and further decreases resource use.  Resume with `Resume()` when needed.  These `Try` operations are best-effort.  See [Performance and debugging](./overview-features-apis.md#performance-and-debugging) in _Overview of WebView2 APIs_.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Optimize web content

Optimize the rendered content.  Observe whether excessive memory is being used in the JavaScript heap.  Use Microsoft Edge DevTools, such as the **Memory** tool, to monitor usage of memory resources by various web content.
<!-- todo:

> how to check the js heap; how do devs see how much js heap is used?

Author: How to check the JS heap; how do Devs see how much JS heap is used?
Can they see that in Visual Studio?

@prija-microsoft @Lakshmisha-KS 

* Broke up the orig run-on sentence.
* Linked to a specific article instead of entire DevTools docset.

Draft doc:
<img width="587" height="90" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/07e9cd93-71e5-440e-b6dd-beff4fa9693b" />

Result: 
<img width="852" height="312" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/faa4bccd-1f3a-4f2f-af27-0a00bcc5b065" />

Reviewer 3: THis can be done by memory tab in devtools
<img width="1662" height="970" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/744519f4-50e9-486a-a678-cd1a6510d784" />

Details on https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools/memory-problems/heap-snapshots

GPU drivers and additional buffers must be allocated, which requires additional memory.

See also
* [WebView2 browser flags](./webview-features-flags.md) - `disable-gpu`

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Streamline web content

Optimize pages by using the following techniques:

* Limit heavy JavaScript.

* Debounce or throttle tasks.

* Use CSS (rather than JavaScript) for animations.

* Split long scripts to keep the UI responsive.

* Use Microsoft Edge DevTools to identify bottlenecks.

* Use typical web optimization: avoid excessive layout thrashing, where a script alternates between reading and writing DOM properties, causing multiple reflows.

See also:
* [Performance tool: Analyze your website's performance](../../devtools/performance/overview.md)
* [Analyze runtime performance (tutorial)](../../devtools/performance/index.md)
* [Troubleshooting common performance issues](../../devtools/rendering-tools/index.md)
* [Optimize website speed using Lighthouse](../../devtools/speed/get-started.md)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Reduce unnecessary communication

> * Reduce unnecessary communication between native code and web code running in WebView2<!-- todo: orig: between the host and WebView2 -->.

Author: which?
* Reduce unnecessary communication between native code and web code running in WebView2.
* Reduce unnecessary communication between the host and WebView2.

The 1st version above is the revised version.
The 2nd version above is the orig draft, per draft doc:
<img width="588" height="69" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0ca9af7a-e965-4728-9ae3-a945d627ab04" />

@prija-microsoft, @Lakshmisha-KS
